# ICAR_dispersal_model: An ICAR spatial model to reconstruct regional geographic variations in arrival times
All data and scripts required to reproduce the analysis for the paper 'An ICAR spatial model to reconstruct regional geographic variations in arrival times' are located within this repository. The repository is organised into four main directories: _src_, _scripts_, _data_, _output_.

# Bayesian Analyses
The repository contains scripts and results of an hierarchical Bayesian ICAR model used to inferred arrival times on different sets of simulated data with underlying dispersal patterns. In addition, analysis using a hierarchical Bayesian phasemodel provides a benchmark of an existing method. 
All models were defined and fitted using the [nimble](https://r-nimble.org/) R package, with the additional support of custom distributions and utility functions of the [nimbleCarbon](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=nimbleCarbon) R package. **Please note that the analyses are computationally intensive**

# Folder Structure
* the _src_ folder contains all functions inputs required for the analysis
* the _scripts_ folder contains all the R-code scripts for running the analysis and generating the figures
* the _data_ folder contains the simulated data required to reproduce the analysis
* the _output_ folder contains all outputs generated by the scripts, including figures. MCMC posterior samples of all analyses are stored as R image files in this directory.

# Analyses Scripts
In the _scripts_ folder: 
* `womble_model_tactical_uncal.R` is used to analyse a hierarchical ICAR model on simulated calendar dates. Calling this script first generates a dataset (saved as `tactical_sim_woa_noerror.RData` in the _data_ folder), then implements the model saving the output as `Womblemodel_tactical_woa_norerrors.RData`. Approximate runtime: ~ 5 hours.
* `womble_model_tactical_cal.R ` is used to analyse a hierarchical ICAR model on simulated radiocarbon dates. Calling this script first generates a dataset (saved as `tactical_sim_icar.RData` in the _data_ folder), then implements the model saving the output as `Womblemodel_tactical_icar.RData`. Approximate runtime: ~ 48 hours. 
* `womble_model_tactical_phasemodel.R ` is used to analyse a hierarchical phasemodel on simulated radiocarbon dates. Calling this script first generates a dataset (saved as `tactical_sim_icar.RData` in the _data_ folder), then implements the model saving the output as `Womblemodel_tactical_phasemodel.RData`. Approximate runtime: ~ 48 hours.
* `womble_model_tactical_icar_sitenumber.R` is used to analyse a hierarchical ICAR model on mulitple simulated calendar datasets. Calling this script generates the data and then implements the model ten times, saving the output as `Womblemodel_tactical_icar_sitenumber.RData`. Approximate runtime: ~ 32 hours.
* `womble_model_tactical_icar_clustering.R` is used to analyse a hierarchical ICAR model on mulitple simulated calendar datasets. Calling this script generates the data and then implements the model ten times, saving the output as `Womblemodel_tactical_icar_clustering.RData`. Approximate runtime: ~ 32 hours.  

Also in the _scripts_ folder is `figures.R` used to generate all the figures found in the manuscript and supplementary material.

# Datasets
Simulated data were used to assess the robustness of the proposed ICAR model. The simulated datasets required for all analyses are contained in the directory _data_. Each dataset is generated by calling the sim_data() function from the `sim_data.R` script located in the _src_ folder.  Specifically,
* `tactical_sim_woa_noerror.RData` contains the simulated data for the Wave of Advance simulation ("Section 3.1. Wave of Advance Simulation" in the paper).
* `tactical_sim_icar.RData` contains the simulated data one covariate for both the ICAR model and phasemodel analyses ("Section 3.2. Comparing the ICAR model to a Phase model" in the paper).

Further, in the directory _data_, there are R images:
* `trig.RData` ~ the file `triangulation.R` (also in the _scripts_ folder) generates `trig.RData` which contains node and edge information from delaunay triangulation between regional hexagonal areas.
* `sample_window.RData` ~ contains spatial information defining the sample region and local hexagon areas. Again, generated from the `triangulation.R` (found in the _scripts_ folder).


# File Relationships

| **Analysis**                                          | **Analyses Script**                    | **Simulated Data**                                                 | **R Image containing Results**              |
|-------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Hierarchical ICAR Model (Simulated, calendar dates)   | womble_model_tactical_uncal.R          | Simulated from sim_data(). Saved as tactical_sim_woa_noerror.RData | Womblemodel_tactical_woa_norerrors.RData    |
| Hierarchical ICAR Model (Simulated, radiocarbon dates)| womble_model_tactical_cal.R            | Simulated from sim_data(). Saved as tactical_sim_icar.RData        | Womblemodel_tactical_icar.RData             |
| Hierarchical Phasemodel (Simulated, radiocarbon dates)| womble_model_tactical_phasemodel.R     | Simulated from sim_data(). Saved as tactical_sim_icar.RData        | Womblemodel_tactical_phasemodel.RData       |
| Hierarchical ICAR Model (Simulated, calendar dates)   | womble_model_tactical_icar_sitenumber.R| Multiple simulated from sim_data()                                 | Womblemodel_tactical_icar_sitenumber.RData  |
| Hierarchical ICAR Model (Simulated, calendar dates)   | womble_model_tactical_icar_clustering.R| Multiple simulated from sim_data()                                 | Womblemodel_tactical_icar_clustering.RData  |


# R session Info

This project uses **renv** to manage package versions. After cloning the repository, the environment can be reproduced by running: 
```r
install.packages("renv") 
renv::restore()
```

# Note on reproducibility

Estimates of runtime are based on Ubuntu 24.04.3 running on a Dell Inc. PowerEdge R650xs with 128GiB RAM (DIMM DDR4 Synchronous Registered (Buffered) 3200 MHz (0.3 ns)) and 96 Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6336Y CPU @ 2.40GHz  each with 36864  KB cache.



